hi
first of all I just want to give
a big
to the organizers of this
conference I feel like this has
been a fantastic smooth
experience from start to finish
so amazing job
hi I'm Angela the keel I am an
English teacher turned
computational linguists turned
software developer and as I
mentioned a little bit earlier
today about six months ago I
knew nothing about functional
programming and very little
about JavaScript
so what I want to do today is
kind of take you guys along on
some of the things I've learned
about doing functional
programming in JavaScript and i
am not an expert in any of this
so this is going to be me taking
you along on my learning journey
and nothing more
i'm going to try and save a
little time for questions at the
end but we'll see how that turns
out
so how did I end up standing
here talking to you guys about
functional programming in
JavaScript about six months ago
in the fall of 2015 i went to a
programming community in New
York City called the wreaker
center which quick plug is
probably the best programming
community I've ever experienced
and it's a programming retreat
where you can go and learn about
whatever is interesting to you
in the world of computer science
and so I got there and a lot of
people were talking about
functional programming
functional programming has
school closure
all this cool stuff a lot of
people were working in
JavaScript getting into node and
these were some really
interesting topics and so I
started talking to people there
and finding out what is all this
stuff
so what is functional
programming few different ways
that question can be answered
first of all it's a programming
paradigm some other paradigms
are like imperative programming
when you say do this and then do
that or object oriented
programming which may be a lot
of you right
object-oriented javascript where
you have objects and they have
methods on them and and you
change them etc etc functional
programming is also a paradigm
where functions are king and
we'll talk about what that means
in a little bit
it's also a style of coding of
organizing your code writing
your code style of approaching
project and really more than
that it's kind of a mindset you
can get into a way of thinking
about a problem a way of
approaching a task and it's also
a really sexy trend with lots of
words
buzz words that will make you
super popular when you're
talking with people at the
pre-conference party or whatever
no just kidding but it is
something that's gotten a lot of
attention and so yeah I thought
it was important to find out why
everybody was so excited about
it
so why do functional programming
in JavaScript specifically
well I don't know about for all
of you perhaps more experienced
javascript developers but when i
started learning javascript
having had some object oriented
programming experience with Java
C sharp that kind of thing i
found object oriented javascript
super confusing prototype all
inheritance how does that work
this this q how many of you guys
quick show of hands I've ever
run into a bug or a problem or
something unexpected with this
doing something yeah exactly
right
so I found that really tricky
and confusing and so I that all
right i want to know I want to
get more into JavaScript but let
me set aside the object
orientation and try to think
about things in the functional
way which is maybe simpler in
some ways and avoid some of
these problems like bugs
introduced by binding this to
the wrong thing
so functional javascript to me
at least it's a bit safer a bit
less turkey a bit easier to
debug but easier to maintain
as sure as you're building a
project and we'll take a look at
some of the features that make
that easier and a bit
also there is already a huge
community of developers who are
doing JavaScript in a functional
style so there's a lot of
libraries out there to help you
do to help you write functional
javascript
there's a lot of people out
there that are experts in this
for example there was a talk in
the next room over earlier today
on on Rhonda and their people
here you can talk to you
probably know a lot more about
functional javascript than i do
but the point is there's already
a community so this isn't this
isn't necessarily something
you'd be doing on your own
grappling you versus javascript
there's other people to support
you
which I found really helpful ok
so hopefully by now I've
convinced you that functional
programming is at least
interesting and that we could do
it in JavaScript to avoid this
headaches etc
how can we do it what does it
mean
this is what I was asking myself
so the main thing and maybe it
sounds like a tautology or
obvious is that in functional
programming you want to do
everything with function so we
want to express everything in
our program in terms of
functions on a function of
course is just something that
takes an input and gives an
output so we want to be thinking
about kind of the flow of data
of inputs and outputs through
the program instead of thinking
about objects and how they
interact and how to manipulate
or thinking about a step in a
recipe like an imperative style
you were really thinking about
how we can express everything in
terms of functions taking input
giving output
so for example this would be a
non-functional way for me to get
the text hi I'm on Gina to
appear on the screen
I could assign a variable call
it on Gina
I sorry I call it name and have
it stored the text on Gina
I could have a greeting like hi
I'm or hello I'm whatever and
then I could log that to the
console
this is
sort of an imperative style
first do this then do that then
do this other thing we don't
have functions here we're not
expressing this in terms of how
inputs are transformed into
outputs so maybe a more
functional way of doing the same
thing and this is a really
simple example just sort of the
sake of it is to define a
function called greet which
takes a parameter name and
returns a string which adds
hi I'm to that the beginning of
that name
so for example if i type greet
the string on Gina a feeding
that is input then I get the
output
hi I'm on Jenna that's a more
functional way expressing this
in terms of functions
ok so another maybe the main
thing about functional
programming is to avoid side
effects and instead to use pure
functions
so what does that mean a side
effect is anything that a
function might do that isn't
computing its output from the
inputs you given and returning
that output
so for example printing
something to the console is not
returning an output it's doing
something else something that's
on the side of the function or
if you are reading in if you're
if you have a function that uses
some globally defined variable
to compute its output that
doesn't depend only on the input
to that function so that's not
pure
it's taking something from
outside the function and
involving it in some way and
what the function does so this
is just a really quick
explanation of what a pure
function that avoid side effects
would do
for more information on that
there is excellent wikipedia
articles these sort of things
but basically the idea is that
you want your function to do
nothing except take its input
use that and only that to
compute an output and then
return it
that's pure so for example this
function here we have this
globally defined variable name
which gets used in the function
as you can see in the last line
there it gets you so that
there's no input we don't have
any
as an argument to this function
it's just reading something in
from the global state that's not
pure also not pure because the
return value of this function
here isn't what we care about we
care about doing something
changing the world in some way
other than the return value in
this case printing to the
console
so this is a not pure function
here
a pure function might look like
this here we have the only thing
that matters to the output of
this function is its input the
the parameter name it with the
argument that we passed to it
and the only thing that it does
is return its output
ok so i've been talking for a
while now about your functions
that's because this is really
like a key thing at least for me
something I've taken away as one
of the key parts of functional
programming is thinking about
things as purely as possible
another key point would be using
higher order functions so this
means functions that can take as
inputs other functions or a
function that can return a
function at output
so basically we're treating
functions kind of as objects
themselves they they can be
passed to other functions you
can have layers functions within
functions within functions etc
and these are what's called
higher order functions they come
up a lot in functional
programming
this is a bit of a random
example but let's say we have
this function at the top here
make objects to fire
we give it an adjective and it
returns actually a function
it doesn't return a string or a
number or anything like that it
returns us a function which adds
that adjective to a string that
you give it
so for example i can use the
make a dejected fire function
feed at the input cool and get a
function that's called cool fire
so now when I pass a string to
cool the fire
I get cool added to that string
so if i pass conference I get
cool conference
so the idea here is that we have
a first order a higher order
function which returns a
function and this kind of
wrapping your head around this
at least for me is one of the
key things to being able to
write in a functional style
because as well see a bit later
we need these higher-order
functions in order to avoid some
of the the tricks that were used
to using from other paradigms
so learning to think to get into
that functional mindset for me
really involved
wrapping my head around this
concept ok so one of these
things that we're going to avoid
that we're used to doing is
iterating using like four
while these sort of things were
used to going over lists and
doing things to all the items in
it instead in a functional style
we might use higher order
functions like map or reduce or
filter which often take as an
input not only the list that you
want to do something to in some
way but also a function that
then you're going to apply to it
in the interest of time I'm not
going to go into too much detail
about what
mapreduce and filter do but i
found and also thanks to my
colleague . lead up there a
really cool graphic that I think
expresses happen to reduce
pretty well maybe you guys have
seen it before
the MapReduce sandwich everyone
so the idea here is that lets
say you have a list in this case
a bunch of vegetables their
whole vegetables we got some
bread in there too and we want
to transform that data in some
way
so for example let's say we want
to slice that data and we have a
function slice up or cut up or
chop which we can apply to each
item in that list now usually I
would do for vegetable in
a sandwich ingredients do all of
this
do all this chopping but in a
functional style we'd use map
give it the list of ingredients
and give it the function chop
and i would get out a new list
where everything has been
chopped
then we have a reduced function
which takes which which
basically combines all of the
items in the list in a certain
way in this case layering to
make a delicious sandwich and
filter
let's say could be if you hate
cucumbers
you could have a filter function
which makes sure that only
things that are not cucumbers
get through the filter so these
are the ways we use these
higher-order functions to get
around the type of four or while
iteration that were used to
doing in functional programming
instead we're going to feed
functions to higher order
functions like mapreduce and
filter to get the sandwich that
we want
and again this is not a not
intended to be a totally clear
explanation of how MapReduce and
filter work but there's plenty
of information on
fine the idea is that we want to
use these instead of four
so another thing that we want to
do is we want to avoid mutating
data avoid mutability mutation
in the sense i just mean
changing object in place so when
we have something that's
immutable maybe i'm sure a lot
of you guys are familiar with
the term it's something data
that can't be changed in place
we can once we've said it it's
there forever
it's never going to change so
let's take a look at an example
just because for me this was
another thing that required a
little head wrapping
so this would be an example of
mutation which is non-functional
we have a room is variable which
stores a list of h1 h2 and h3
because that's what we thought
the rooms really that's what i
thought the relevant rooms were
and then we say no no actually
it's not h3 and h4 so let's
replace the thing at index 2 in
in rooms with h 4 and so then we
have rooms has actually changed
we we we went from h1 h2 h3 to h
1 h 2 h 4 so that is it still
stored in the variable rooms but
we've actually change something
in place and this is something
that functional programming
avoid because this can cause a
lot of problems and this is part
of the reason why we get into
trouble with this and with these
sort of object oriented
approaches
sometimes you can change things
in a way that you didn't intend
so that what you thought you
were dealing with if I thought
that rooms meant h1 h2 h3 and I
didn't know that somewhere else
in my code i had replaced
something in the rooms are a I
could have done to run into
trouble I could I could end up
introducing bugs into my code
and having a really hard time
tracking them down because rooms
here is the right thing rooms
there is the wrong thing
what happened where did this go
wrong oh my god you end up
crying in front of your computer
no just me now so a better way
to go about things is to think
of all data as immutable never
changing for example with no
mutation
we still have our rooms which it
has the the wrong h1 h2 h3 but
instead of changing it in place
I'm going to make a new rooms or
a using this map function that
we talked about a little bit
earlier where I'm mapping
I'm fun feeding a function into
this map which looks at each
room in the list and if it's a
ch3 groups i have a missing
equal sign their last minute
slides if the room is a ch3 it
returns h4 instead of h three
otherwise it returns whatever
the room was ok understanding
this big specific example is not
crucial but the point is that
once I've done once I've
assigned this new rooms variable
new rooms has the correct that
the values i expect h1 h2 + h
for but rooms is the same as it
always was
it hasn't changed at all so this
is thinking about rooms as being
immutable we're not changing it
and that's something that's
really important for functional
programming because as I said it
helps you avoid a lot of
headaches a lot of bugs
so how much time do I have
okay good we have a little time
to talk about persistent data
structure seeing the problem
with the mutability is that when
you have when you're treating
arrays and things like that as
immutable what you end up doing
is making new copies of
everything
so if i want to change my one
room in this list
I have to make a whole new array
and when you're dealing with
short little things like this
maybe that's not a big deal but
as your objects get bigger more
complex
this can give you efficiency
problems because if you have to
copy over everything even the
things that didn't change every
time you make one little
adjustment you want to make a
new copy of a slightly different
copy of your array you end up
it takes you a lot of time you
have to go through everything in
the list to copy it over
you end up using a lot of space
that maybe once the objects that
are getting bigger and bigger
becomes a problem
and so one thing that's very
popular in the functional world
as a way of getting around these
efficiency issues is to use
persistent data structures
this was something introduced
sort of theoretically by Phil
Bagwell he wrote a paper called
ideal hash trees
I can put a link in the slide so
that later and then Richie who
invented the language closure
implemented the data structures
using Bagwell's ideas to make
closure really efficient for
these immutable data structures
and for these functional
operations
ok so the way persistent data
structures work if I may if you
will indulge me
I'm going to step back to the
chalkboard right here we're
getting retro
yeah happening uh-huh ok so if
we have like an array where we
had each one
h2 h3 typically what I do in a
mutable world is just get rid of
this replace it with a chore but
as we said we want to avoid that
so instead if I copy it over
into a new array i copy h1 I
copy h2 and I replace instead of
copying h3 i put in h4 great but
now i have to store two arrays
taking up a lot of time look how
long that took me to do all of
that terrible right
I know you guys feel is as upset
about this as i do I can see it
in your faces
what if instead we represented
this array right here as a treat
such that each leaf node of the
tree is one of the things that
I'm trying to store or perhaps
two of the things or three or 32
or some number of the things and
if i want to change something
I don't need to replace the
entire array I can just make a
new node over here like h4 and
now i can make a new tree which
instead of repeating h1 and h2 I
can reuse those same things and
just make a new node which
connect them to my new element
over here so that now i have a
here
a data structure which contains
h 1 h 2 NH 4 but I didn't need
to make a whole new thing I just
needed to make my one little one
little part i can reuse the old
structure of the list
so this this idea this sort of
topic is called structural
sharing because we can share
parts of the old versions with
the new versions so we have much
more efficient operations for
adding changing things are
moving things from from vectors
for example or arrays and this
can also be done for maps for
four
pash maps that sort of thing and
it basically makes the world of
functional programming bust wide
open so that we don't have to go
through these long time and
expensive space operations to
update are immutable data all
the time so to do this in
JavaScript
there are a couple of libraries
that are really popular one
which i like to use is called
Maury which I'll show you the
link for a little bit which
actually uses closure script
which has these type of data
structures natively it supports
them over to JavaScript so you
can use them right from
JavaScript and it's great
I it has a lot of also like
general functional programming
helpers like map and reduce and
lots of other things
there's also another popular
library called a mutable jas
which facebook put out which is
JavaScript through and through
I haven't worked as much with
that but i know a lot of people
like that as well and yes so
these are ways we can try out
using these immutable data
structures
if that is something you feel
like you can't wait to do now
I know I can just feel the
excitement yeah
ok moving on if you're ready to
try it out
like I said we have Maury and
immutable jas links there to
those libraries
there's also a lot of utility
libraries which don't focus so
much on this persistent data
structure thing but also but but
instead give you a lot of helper
functions like that
excuse me MapReduce etc so
underscore low - for example
today I found out that ram de is
a thing because there was a talk
on it the other day and there
are many more
and in fact
javascript has some built-in
functions like for example
arrays have a built-in map
reduce function so a few slides
ago we saw this room's . map
that's because the array
prototype has these functions
Map Reduce etc so you can even
you do some functional
programming in pure vanilla
JavaScript without using any of
these libraries
ok so if you are sitting there
thinking what I didn't really
get that something about
mutability side effect for
functions what now huh
if you want to learn a bit more
about all these buzzwords like I
said all these 60 buzzwords that
I've been throwing at you for
the last 20 minutes and i highly
recommend a nice gentle
introductory article called an
introduction to functional
programming by Mary Rose cook
who is a former facilitator at
the wreaker center that I keep
talking about the link is is up
there but basically this is a
this is a really nice
introduction that that kind of
goes into a little bit more
depth in some of the
commandments of functional
programming that I have
mentioned today so if you are a
little intrigued but not quite
clear on all these this stuff
that I've been mentioning i
highly recommend you check it
out
so I think that's it for my talk
oh we have a couple of minutes
for questions I suppose the
eight minutes my account and but
first of all I just wanted to
say thank you guys very much and
i'm on genetic heel on tequila
on Twitter and has link there to
my github so would love to keep
in touch if you if anybody else
is out there also learning
functional javascript as a
newbie like myself definitely
reach out we can stick together
but first of all i want to give
a huge thanks to again the jas
kana on conf organizer
especially the diversity
sponsors I'm here on a diversity
ticket myself wouldn't have been
able to come without that
awesome program and all of you
and and the sponsors who sponsor
those tickets and also a huge
huge thank you to the wreaker
center and some of the Alumni
there who have helped me learn
all this stuff including a lead
at the back there and Sal Becker
another alum who explained a lot
of this stuff to me over several
long caffeine fueled
conversations at the wreaker
center and if any of you are
interested in spending time on a
self-directed educational
programming retreat in New York
City definitely check out
recurse . com
it's an amazing community ok
that's it for me
yeah I don't know if i'll be
able to answer them but I can
try
yeah actually always the
original function and I was so I
think that's a great question
and it kind of gets into a
little bit of the what I think
of this kind of the philosophy
of programming paradigms
so as i was learning about
functional programming and i
started even wondering what is a
programming paradigm and why do
people fight about them why do
people say object orientation
Sox we have to do everything
functional and why do people say
no functional programming Sox we
need object orientation and the
conclusion that i came to is
that no one paradigm is better
or worse than other paradigms
they just have different
advantages and disadvantages and
they have different situations
in which they're going to be
kind of the the best tool for
that particular problem
so for example if you just want
to really quickly write up a
script that just does something
on your computer once really
fast
you probably just going to do it
in an imperative style do this
then do that then do the other
thing if you don't need to
maintain it if you just needed
to happen right there
imperative programming is a
totally legit paradigm for that
if you're trying to model real
world objects and how they
interact and how they go around
and things you can do like if
you're trying to model I don't
know
books in a library or classes
with teachers and students and
how they all interrelated that
sort of thing may be thinking
about it in an object-oriented
way makes most sense because
that's exactly the problem
you're trying to solve this
modeling object and that's why
that paradigm came about but if
you're trying to avoid some of
those problems that i was
talking about when you have
maybe a situation that doesn't
actually refer to real-world
objects where you're using
object just because you have to
and that's introducing all kinds
of side effects and weird bugs
that are hard to track down
maybe you want to consider
thinking about it in terms of
functions on your data and
things being pipeline through
multiple functions and and
undergoing various and
transformation not in the sense
that the data is being mutated
but in the sense that we're
getting new outputs and based on
old input then functional
programming is probably the way
to go and it has a lot of
advantages such as being nicely
you can break things down into
small functions that only do one
thing
so if you want to change
something you don't have to
change an entire class structure
you can just change the one
little function that does the
thing you want to change so i
think it's just a it has
advantages it has disadvantages
I definitely wouldn't say it's
better than object orientation
in all cases and I definitely
wouldn't say object orientation
is better in all cases either
it really depends on your
situation
I used to be a philosophy major
so that might be what
function the function is not
working
so do you mix it
people that come from object
oriented and not much to do we
just passed functions
, see that's another function
could follow non-blocking and
concurrency and promises are all
things that i do not feel
qualified to talk about right
here
I would love to turn that
question over to the audience
though
anybody want to respond
yeah
what
ok
fight fight fight
just get just kidding
just getting that would be
against the code of conduct you
guys I will also get ok but can
discuss this later
small outside the conversation
starter question though
excellent question and i would
love to know the answer look
forward to talking to you guys
but um I guess with their talks
a big talk
thank you thank you